Assignment No. 3: MPI / OpenMP

Aim: To develop a distributed system to find the sum of N elements in an array by distributing N/n elements to n number of processors using 

MPI or OpenMP and demonstrate the intermediate sums calculated at different processors.
OpenMP is an Application Program Interface (API) used for parallel programming in C and C++. It helps programmers create multi-threaded applications for shared memory systems. In distributed systems, parallel processing is important because large tasks can be divided among multiple processors, which improves speed and efficiency. OpenMP makes this easier by using simple compiler directives such as #pragma omp.

OpenMP follows the fork-join model of execution. At the beginning, only one master thread executes the program sequentially. When the program reaches a parallel region, the master thread creates multiple worker threads. This is called the fork stage. These threads execute the assigned task simultaneously. After completing the work, all threads combine again into a single master thread. This is called the join stage.

In this practical, a distributed system is developed to calculate the sum of N elements in an array using OpenMP. Instead of one processor calculating the total sum alone, the array elements are divided among multiple threads. Each thread calculates a partial sum, and finally all partial sums are combined to get the final answer.

The main part of the program uses the OpenMP directive:
#pragma omp parallel num_threads(2)
This statement creates 2 threads for parallel execution. The block inside this directive is executed by both threads. Each thread gets its unique ID using omp_get_thread_num() and also gets the total number of threads using omp_get_num_threads().
Each thread calculates and stores its result in a variable called local_sum. After this, all local sums are added to the final sum using:
#pragma omp atomic
sum += local_sum;
The atomic keyword is used to prevent race conditions. It ensures that only one thread updates the shared variable sum at a time, which makes the program correct and safe.

In conclusion, this assignment successfully demonstrates the use of OpenMP for finding the sum of N elements in an array using parallel processing. It shows how work is divided among threads, how intermediate sums are calculated, and how the final result is obtained. OpenMP provides a simple and effective way to implement parallel programming in distributed systems.
